Back in 2005,
the faithful slave provided counsel
regarding higher education
in the October 1, 2005, issue
of The Watchtower, pages 26-31.
The article was entitled
“Parents—What Future Do You
Want for Your Children?”
The cover of the very next issue,
October 15, 2005,
asked the question:
“What Is the Best Education?”
You may have noticed
that we’ve not published
that thorough of a discussion
on the subject since that time.
Why is that?
Has the Governing Body
changed its position
regarding the pursuit
of higher secular education?
No.
We feel that all of the cautions
that we have addressed
in the past are still valid.
However,
our goal now is to focus on
and intensify our promotion
of the pursuit of divine education.
If parents and young ones
are motivated
to avidly pursue divine education,
the quest for higher secular education
becomes less and less of an issue.
As most of you know,
I am a father.
My wife and I
raised two boys in the truth
—once a father, always a father.
So even though my sons
are grown and married,
I still think like a father,
and that is why I wanted
to address this subject
on JW Broadcasting.
Higher education:
What do we mean
when we use that expression?
The October 1, 2005, issue
of The Watchtower,
that I referred to earlier,
provided a definition.
It used the example
of the educational system
in the United States,
acknowledging that it involves
12 years of basic education
in public schools.
Then it stated:
“Thereafter, students may choose
“to attend university . . .
for four or more years,
“leading to a bachelor’s degree
or to postgraduate studies
“for careers in medicine, law,
engineering, and so forth.
“Such university education
is what is meant
when the term
‘higher education’ is used.”
It further stated:
“On the other hand,
“there are technical
and vocational schools,
“offering short-term courses
that result
in a certificate or diploma
in some trade or service.”
We realize educational systems
vary from place to place.
In some countries,
higher education is provided
by the government free of charge.
However, the cost
of obtaining university training
is not our primary concern.
It is the potential for spiritual harm
that has moved us
to provide the cautions
we have shared in the past.
Ultimately, it is
the decision of the parents
as to the amount of secular education
they feel is necessary
for a child to later care
for a family of his own.
As parents, we would be remiss
if we did not encourage our child
to pursue a skill or trade
that would enable him
to start off a marriage successfully.
Having said that,
it does not change the fact
that all too often our young people
have met with spiritual disaster,
especially after leaving home
and living on a university campus.
So, parents and children,
you need to have a goal,
and you need to have a plan.
If you’re missing either one,
Satan will provide it for you.
Young people, ask yourself:
‘Why am I considering
additional education?
‘Is it because I’m pursuing
a specific skill or trade
‘to support
my service to Jehovah?
‘Or have I been pressured
by the system into believing
‘that higher education
will somehow make me
a more respected person
or lead me to a better life?’
Let me review the Scriptural basis
for our previous published concerns
about higher education.
As an example,
1 Corinthians 15:33 says:
“Bad associations
spoil useful habits.”
While it is true
that the ancient city of Corinth
was known
for its immoral lifestyle,
what was the apostle Paul
primarily concerned about
when he penned those words?
In verse 12 of the same chapter,
he made clear that his comment
about “bad associations”
had to do with what
the other persons believed,
it was a doctrinal issue.
If we are in continued association
with those who
do not believe the same,
it can erode
our thinking and convictions.
Some have felt that
spending time with nonbelievers
in a university setting is no different
than working secularly
with those who
do not share our beliefs.
And, in fact, bad associations
in the workplace can be a real danger.
However, it is one thing
to work on a job with others
and quite another matter
to immerse oneself
in an institution of learning.
At Romans 12:2,
Paul said to “stop being molded
by this system of things,
but be transformed
by making your mind over.”
We are to be careful
that this system
does not mold,
or shape, our thinking.
The verse said
to ‘make over your minds,’
not hand over your minds.
Higher learning
can easily influence thinking
and attitudes.
Elders in congregations
that are in close proximity
to universities are well aware
of the repeated scenario
of parents coming
to the Kingdom Hall
with the child that they’re dropping off
to attend the nearby university.
Sadly, often in a few weeks or months,
the child begins missing meetings.
Not too long into the school year,
he totally disappears.
Then the parents are upset
with the local body of elders
for not shepherding their child.
My question is,
Who dropped them
off at the university?
So where does
the responsibility really lie?
When we make a decision,
we must realistically
also accept the consequences.
Turn with me
to 2 Timothy 2:20.
This was written by Paul
as an illustration
for Timothy to consider.
Now it makes sense
that the large house
commented on refers to
the congregation,
and the utensils of varying value
would be like individual members
of the congregation.
2 Timothy 2:20-22:
“Now in a large house there are utensils
not only of gold and silver
“but also of wood and earthenware,
“and some for an honorable use
but others for a use lacking honor.
So if anyone keeps clear of,”
or doesn’t associate
with these,
“[the latter] ones,
he will be an instrument
“for an honorable use, sanctified,
useful to his owner,”
Jehovah God,
“prepared for every good work.
“So flee from youthful desires,
but pursue righteousness,
“faith, love, peace,
along with those who call
on the Lord out of a clean heart.”
If we should be that careful
about our association
inside the congregation,
the application
is even more appropriate
when it comes
to institutions of secular learning.
I have long said,
“The better the university,
the greater the danger.”
The most intelligent
and eloquent professors
will be trying to reshape
the thinking of your child,
and their influence
can be tremendous.
One mom, I recall,
asked me to try and help her son
who was attending
a prestigious university in Rhode Island.
After visiting him,
I later had to inform her
that her son
now believed in evolution.
She refused to believe it
until he finally told her himself.
How sad!
In Romans chapter 14,
it counsels us
not to judge,
or become overly critical of,
the decisions of others.
As we mentioned earlier,
ultimately the parents must decide
how much education
a child needs to succeed in life.
But does that mean
that any decision a parent makes
regarding a child’s education
is fine with Jehovah?
Follow along with the reasoning
in Romans chapter 14,
verses 10-12.
“But why do you judge your brother?
Or why do you also
look down on your brother?”
Here’s a valid point:
‘For he will stand
before the judgment seat of God.
‘For it is written:
‘“As surely as I live,”
says Jehovah,
‘“to me every knee will bend,
and every tongue
will make
open acknowledgment to God.”’
Here Jehovah guarantees
that one day
every person on earth
will be a true worshipper of him.
Will you be there?
Will your son or daughter
be among those alive at that time?
Do your personal decisions matter?
Yes.
Look at verse 12:
“So, then,
each of us will render an account
for himself to God.”
Yes, we all
will have to answer to Jehovah
for the decisions we make today.
May we all decide
to play it safe before our God.
Think of all the opportunities
there are now
to enjoy divine education:
congregation meetings,
family worship,
assemblies and conventions,
the jw.org website,
and the station
you’re watching right now.
But in addition to all of that,
the curriculum
for the Pioneer Service School
has been revised and is getting
superb reviews by those attending.
Then there’s the new curriculum
for the School for Kingdom Evangelizers
that bolsters and trains
students for a career
in a variety of theocratic privileges.
In addition to promoting divine education,
what secular skills will we be promoting?
Skills that’ll be useful
to God’s organization now
and after Armageddon.
For example,
we need construction skills
around the world right now!
And think about this:
We will not need doctors or lawyers
after Armageddon,
but we will need carpenters
and plumbers
and similar construction trades.
It requires faith
to decline higher education
and have the confidence
that our material needs will be cared for
by training
in other fields of employment.
Speaking of lawyers,
we have an interesting perspective
from Brother Philip Brumley
of the Legal Department.
Let’s go to our Patterson studio
and listen to an interview of him
conducted by Brother David Schafer,
a helper to the Teaching Committee.
Thank you very much, Brother Morris.
And we’re delighted to have with us
Brother Philip Brumley,
overseer of the Legal Department.
He’s been a full-time servant
for the past 41 years
and for the last 28 years
has been overseer
of the Legal Department.
Brother Brumley,
thank you very much
for taking the time to be with us today.
I know you have a very busy schedule.
My pleasure.
How did it come about that you came
to work in the Legal Department?
So I was working
in the carpenter shop one day,
and I got a telephone call
from Brother Charles Steele.
The Governing Body asked Brother Steele
who could go through law school
to become an attorney.
The organization
needed a few attorneys
to help defend the rights
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
So Brother Steele asked me or,
basically, gave me the assignment,
“We want you to become a lawyer.”
So the organization made a decision
to send you through law school.
What effect did that have on you?
Something happened
that I was not prepared for.
When a person goes to law school,
the instructors,
law professors,
essentially tell the class:
“You’re the hope of humanity.
“You happen to have been born
in the best country on this planet,
“and you happen to be
among the few in this country
“who have the circumstances
to be able to attend law school.
“You are the future presidents,
“governors, senators, judges.
“But not only that,
you’re also the future social activists
“—the ones who are going
to protect the disenfranchised,
“the poor, the one who needs
their rights protected.
“If you do well,
civilization will do well.
If you do poorly,
humanity may not survive.”
Now that may sound
like a grandiose statement,
but when you hear that repeated
over a four-year period,
it can start creeping into your mind.
Another thing that happened,
related to that,
was there’s a fierce spirit
of competition in law school,
and I brought with me the notion
of ‘This is a Bethel assignment,
so I want to do well
—not just well, but very well.’
And David, in the first year,
I scored rather poorly,
and that shocked me.
I thought,
‘I have to do better than this!’
A deep spirit of competition
came into my being
where I would devote
whatever time was required to do well.
And, in one sense, it worked
because when I graduated,
I graduated cum laude, which means
in the top ten percent of the class.
But both the spirit of competition
and the thought
that somehow you were special
because you had this training
had marked my personality.
So how did you come to discern
that this kind of thinking
was rubbing off on you?
In all candor, David,
I didn’t discern.
It wasn’t until after I had gotten
out of law school
that my wife, Elizabeth,
sat me down one day
and in so many words told me,
“You’re not the man I married.”
And I was taken aback.
“What do you mean?”
She pointed out the character flaws
that had developed in me:
ambition, egotism,
selfishness, combativeness,
being argumentative.
And the more I listened to her,
the more I realized,
‘She’s absolutely right!’
I had allowed these defects
to creep into my personality.
The next thing
was what to do about it.
And it’s not like going into a dark room
and flipping on the light.
It’s not like recognizing that you have
character flaws that need work
and next week
you’ve got it cared for.
In all candor, David,
it was a lengthy process
to get these elements
out of my system.
What did you do?
We had to get back into or—
I had to get back
into a genuine spiritual routine
and to reassess the motives
behind what I was doing.
Rather than being self-motivated,
as in,
‘I want to do a good job
so that it looks good for me,
or it reflects well on me,’
the real point is to serve Jehovah,
to seek Kingdom interest,
to do what Jehovah
wants to have done.
So the actual routine
—real earnest prayer,
reading the Bible daily,
going to the meetings
and really participating in them,
and having a meaningful ministry
—getting those spiritual priorities
first in my life again,
as they had been before,
put me back on the right track.
So this was a number
of years ago now.
You’re all better?
You perceive no residual effects,
then, from the training?
We have to keep working
on these things.
You always have to assess motivation.
A sister who’s serving here
in the Bethel family,
who also has
several degrees to her name,
said it well when she said,
“I’m still working to get the venom
of self-importance out of my mind.”
So I work very hard, David,
to make sure that humility
is not a front but it’s from my bones
—it’s really what I am on the inside.
When the scripture says:
‘Doing nothing
out of contentiousness,
but looking at others
as being superior to you,’
that’s the attitude to have.
And then, candidly,
you give Jehovah something to bless.
When we obtain a legal victory
or a development happens
that’s favorable
to Jehovah’s Witnesses,
all thanks go to Jehovah
because in the years
that I’ve been serving
in the Legal Department,
I can assure you that
it is not because of the expertise
of those of us who happen to have
this privilege of service.
Rather, it’s because there’s
a spiritual motivation to our work
to where we work hard
and then see
what Jehovah wants
to do with the matter.
And time and again, David,
we’ve seen Jehovah’s hand
in our work.
And when something
favorable happens,
rather than in any way thinking,
‘Well that was because I
did such a good job,’
the genuine reality of it
is that Jehovah did a good job.
This is what Jehovah
wanted to have happen,
and that’s why we were successful.
So Philip, you’re an attorney;
you serve at Bethel.
Undoubtedly, young people have come
to you asking your opinion on this.
What do you tell a young person
who’s considering
pursuing higher education?
Well, the first thing
that anyone should do
is to ask themselves
to closely examine themselves
as to the motive.
Is the motive really
to seek first the Kingdom,
to use some additional schooling
to facilitate pioneering
or serving at Bethel
or serving where there’s
a greater need?
Or, actually, is the motive
one of obtaining
a certain standard of living
or a certain degree of prominence?
So the real core issue is,
Why is an individual
obtaining this additional training?
The second thing
for someone to keep in mind is
to be focused on what they
really are going to learn.
To attend a university,
learning things that have little to do
with what one can do to earn a living,
really serves no purpose.
On the other hand,
if a person happens to have
an inclination towards medicine,
well, becoming a nurse
rather than becoming a doctor
could be an appropriate step.
If a person has an inclination
towards the law,
becoming a paralegal
rather than an attorney
could be an appropriate step.
You see, a person
could be a nurse or paralegal
and easily work part-time
and support himself as a pioneer.
But if a person
becomes a doctor or an attorney,
what you will find is that you
will invariably have to work full-time.
You will invariably have to be paying off
significant student debt,
and it’s going to take quite a lot of time
to get this kind of degree.
So rather than devoting
—or allowing this world to consume—
four, six, eight, or ten years of studies,
why not focus on two years of study
to get some technical training
that would facilitate, or help,
someone to become
a good regular pioneer?
Well said.
Thank you very much
for taking the time with us today.
It’s been a real delight
to be with you.
And now we go back
to Brother Morris in Brooklyn.
Thank you, brothers, for sharing
that very interesting perspective
about the subtle mental conditioning
that can transpire
when exposed to higher education.
Brother Brumley’s experience
in law school was nearly 30 years ago.
Given the spiritual dangers
involved, though,
the Governing Body has decided
that if we need additional
attorneys in the future,
we will not expose
a member of the Bethel family
to the environment
of higher education.
One brother likened his experience
in a university setting
to being in a house that is on fire.
Spiritually speaking, he said:
“Even if you escape alive,
“your clothes still smell like smoke.
It has an effect on you.”
Higher education often instills
a sense of superiority
and self-reliance
that is in direct opposition
to the Christian personality.
Like the smell of smoke on clothes,
these traits can be absorbed very quickly
and can be very difficult to get rid of
once they’re part
of the fabric of your personality.
A circuit overseer sent me a letter
in which he described what he called
“a picture-perfect Witness family”
until the oldest son received
a full scholarship
to attend a university.
The university was
an hour and 45-minute drive from home.
The family wrestled with the decision
to send him off for his extra schooling.
Finally, the opportunity
to get this education,
basically free of charge, won out.
The scholarship included housing
in a coed dorm at the university.
Within just a few weeks,
the son called his parents to say
that he could not remain faithful
to Jehovah in this environment.
He begged his parents
to let him come back home.
The parents told him, “No,
“this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
Figure it out.”
The short story is:
The son left the truth,
the parents divorced,
his siblings
are not doing anything for Jehovah
—so sad.
The opportunity of a lifetime
turned out to be not much
of a life at all.
In contrast, one mother
who was a single parent
related this experience.
When her son was
a senior in high school,
he was offered
a university scholarship.
The mom was concerned
when her son
seemed to be considering
accepting the scholarship.
She did not initially
come right out and say no.
Instead, she expressed her view
by reminding him of the principle
of giving our firstfruits,
our best, to Jehovah.
She said: “The years
after high school are your best years
“because you are young
and strong and healthy
“and you don’t have a lot of obligations
to complicate your life.
“Why not give your firstfruits
to Jehovah and pioneer for a year,
and then consider how much
additional education is required?”
Her son decided to pioneer
and work part-time
instead of accepting his scholarship.
He later served at Bethel.
Looking back,
he is absolutely convinced
that this was the best decision
he could have made.
As a father,
my heart goes out to you parents.
And please understand
that we want
the same thing
for your children that you do.
We want them to be able to care
for their future
physical needs responsibly.
But at the same time,
an extended application
of 3 John 4 applies.
There it says:
“No greater joy do I have than this:
that I should hear that my children
go on walking in the truth.”
Remember, divine education
truly is the opportunity
of an everlasting lifetime.